#Rare splicing events

Accelerated transcription and splicing carries the risk of increasing the frequency of erroneous splicing events, which has been associated with advanced age and shortened lifespan. It is non-trivial to deduce whether a specific splice isoform is the product of erroneous splicing or created in response to a specific signal. Simply checking whether an observed isoform is annotated in some database can be problematic for multiple reasons. For instance, most databases have been created on the basis of data from young animals or embryonic tissue. Thus, a detected isoform that only may be functionally relevant in old animals will not be reported in such databases. Moreover, an annotated isoform might be the result of erroneous splicing if its expression is normally suppressed at a particular age or cellular context. We therefore based our analysis on the notion that extremely rare isoforms (rare with respect to all other isoforms of the same gene in the same sample) are more likely erroneous than frequent isoforms. 

We used Leafcutter, which performs de novo quantification of exon–exon junctions based on split-mapped RNA-seq reads. Owing to its ability to identify alternatively excised intron clusters, Leafcutter is particularly suitable to study rare exon–exon junctions. We defined rare splicing events as exon–exon junctions supported by 0.7% or less of the total number of reads in a given intron cluster, and the gene-specific fraction of rare clusters was computed as the number of rare exon–exon junctions divided by the total number of detected exon–exon junctions in that gene. The average fraction of rare splicing events increased during ageing in the fly and worm, and this effect was reverted under most lifespan-extending conditions. However, we did not observe a consistent age-associated increase of the fraction of rare splice variants across all species, which may at least in part be due to the more complex organization of splice regulation in mammalian cells.
